This is a utility that is designed to generate IOS type 6, 8 and 9 passwords.
Its main goal is to allow customers to configure IOS boxes with encoded
passwords; a secondary goal is to allow customers to examine exactly how we
implement them.

We actually provide two versions, one in C and one in Python (the Python
version, which was not written by me, does only type 6).  Note: when I tested
it, the Python implementtation gave me a syntax error (and not knowing Python,
I can't tell if it's an actual error, or the version of Python on my system
is just too ancient).  I have verified that the C version works.

Now, customers often have their own programs to do network provisioning
(configuration); if their program does need to download encoded passwords,
they'll need a way to construct such a password.  This program attempts to
give multiple ways to integrate with such a program:

- It can be built as a stand-alone utility.  The provisioning application would
  invoke the utility, and pass the password (and the key for type 6); the
   stand alone utility encodes the password, and outputs the password to the
  standard output; the provisioning application would capture it.

- It can be integrated into the provisioning application.  The application
  would call a C routine that we provide; that routine would generate the
  password, and return it to the application.
  
- The program can take the Python version of the code, and use that instead
  of the C version.

As a stand-alone utility, it would be called with the following arguments:
 epp -type <value> -password <password> [-key <type 6 key>] [-salt <salt>]
This computes the value of the password hash, and outputs that to the
standard output (exits with an EXIT_SUCCESS).

- epp is the name we gave the utility; of course, you can rename it to anything
  you wish
- value: this is the hash type.  The supported hash types are:
  6 (or "aes"): this is the IOS type 6 encryption type
  8 (or "sha-256"): this is the IOS type 8 hash type
  9 (or "scrypt"): this is the IOS type 9 hash type
- password: this is the password to hash
- key: this is the key to use for type 6 passwords.  If you are generating a
  type 6 password, this must be provided
- salt: this is the salt to use.  If one is not provided, we will select a
  random salt

On failure, this prints nothing to the standard output.  Instead, it
generates a human readable error on the standard error output, and
exits with an EXIT_FAILURE.

You can also run the program with:
 epp -verify
This will run a set of sanity tests on the internal routines


If you want the Python version, that is located in encode6.py .  That is a
separate version of the code, and will likely need some tweaking to fit
within your environment.


If you want to integrate the C routines with the application, you'll want the
routines in these source files:

ios_hash_password.c  ios_encrypt_password.c convert_bitstring.c
hmac_sha1.c          hmac_sha256.c        scrypt.c
endian.c             select_salt.c        pbkdf2.c
sha1.c               sha256.c             aes.c
md5.c

The C function that the application will call is:

char *ios_encrypt_password(int type, const char *key, const char *password,
                        const char *salt, char *buffer, unsigned buffer_len);

char *ios_hash_password(int type, const char *password, const char *salt,
                        char *buffer, unsigned buffer_len);

The parameters are as follows:
- type; this is the value 6 (for ios_encrypt_password) or 8 or 9 (for
         ios_hash_password), depending on whether you've decided to generate
         a type 6, 8 or 9 password
- key; for ios_encrypt_password, this is a nul-terminated C string containing
         the encryption key
- password; this is a nul-terminated C string containing the password to be
         encoded
- salt; this is either NULL, or a nul-terminated C string containing the salt
         to use when encoding the password.  If NULL, the program will select
         a salt
- buffer; this is either NULL, or a buffer to hold the encoded password.  If
         it is NULL, this routine will malloc a buffer to hold the password
         (and the caller is expected to free it).  If it is given, then the
         password will be placed there.
- buffer_len; if buffer is non-NULL, then this is the length (in bytes) if
         buffer.  If the encoded password takes more memory than can fit in
         the buffer, this returns an error (without overrunning the buffer).

These return a pointer to a nul-terminated C string containing the encoded
password, or NULL on error.


In addition, we provide an additional function do_test_vector; it is designed
to run sanity checks on the various crypto components

It is called by:
    int passed = do_test_vector( SELFTEST_FOO, print_results );
where:
    SELFTEST_FOO indicates the specific primitive to test (SELFTEST_ALL for
        everything)
    print_results is a function to print intermediate results; if you are
        not interested, you can pass NULL
If the test passed, this returns nonzero

This has been defined this way, so that, if a customer wishes, he can call
this to run a general sanity test.

If you decide this functionality is something you want, you'll also need
to compile in the source file test_vector.c; SELFTEST_ALL and friends are
defined in test_vector.h


Here is a summary of the source files included:

aes.c
	This is a light-weight AES implementation
convert_bitstring.c
	This is a utility that converts an arbitrary bitstring, and encode
        it in the format we use within an encoded password
encode6.py
        This is a standalone version of the type 6 encoder/decoder.  It
	is an independent implementation.
endian.c
	These are simple utilities that translate between byte strings, and
	4 byte integers.  We need this because the crypto primitives we
	use interpret byte strings as 4 byte integers of specific endianness;
	this does the conversion without assuming any specific endianness
	of the CPU
epp.c
	This contains all the logic used if this is compiled as a stand-alone
	utility.  You don't need it if you're integrating this utility within
	your application directly.
hmac_sha1.c
	This contains an implementation of the HMAC-SHA1 cryptographical
	primitive.
hmac_sha256.c
	This contains an implementation of the HMAC-SHA256 cryptographical
	primitive.
ios_encrypt_password.c
	This contains the main logic used to encode type 6 passwords
ios_hash_password.c
	This contains the main logic used to encode type 8 and type 9
	passwords
Makefile
        Makefile to compiler the C version of the library, both the
        epp application and the epp.a library.
md5.c
	This is an implementation of the MD5 hash routine (which is used
	within the type 6 password encoding method.  Sorry; that encoding
	method dates back to when MD5 wasn't thought that badly of...
pbkdf2.c
	This contains an implementation of the PBKDF2-SHA256
	cryptographical primitive.  Note that is used for both type 8 and
	type 9 passwords (scrypt, which is what is used with type 9 passwords,
	calls this as a part of encoding its passwords)
scrypt.c
	This contains an implementation of the scrypt cryptographical
	primitive.
select_salt.c
	This contains the logic we use when we select the salt ourselves.
	Now, there is a point here that you may want to tweak; entropy
	collection.  When we select salts, we want some amount of entropy,
	however by living within the restrictions of C89, the sources we
	have access to aren't great.  What we have in this file should be
	good enough; however if you want to provide a better source, you
	are encouraged to do so; see the function get_random_bytes, and
	modify it to include your better entropy source.
sha1.c
	This contains an implementation of the SHA1 cryptographical
	primitive.
sha256.c
	This contains an implementation of the SHA256 cryptographical
	primitive.
test_vector.c
	This contains the sanity checks for this applicatoin

In addition, every .c file (except for epp.c) has a corresponding .h
file; this gives the API you use to call the functions provided by
the .c file.


Now, here were our goals when we wrote this program:
- It tries to be maximally portable, because a customer may want to
  integrate this program (or parts of it) with his management system, and we
  have no idea what that might be.
  We try to make this a strictly conforming C89 program; however, we do fall
  short of the goal in the following aspects:
  - We leave in the restriction that the computer uses ASCII; that's because
    this takes an ASCII password from the user, and hashes it.  It's hard to
    allow someone to use a non-ASCII character set, and still allow all
    printable ASCII characters.  It might work with a Unicode-based C
    compiler; I haven't tried it
  - We assume that we can malloc a reasonable amount of memory (quite
    modest amounts of type 8, about two megabytes for type 9). If you can't
    live with that, you probably should get a real computer
  - The salt generation logic is merely conforming (meaning that it won't
    necessarily work exactly the same way on all implementations); it'll
    generate valid salts everywhere, however, the salts it generates may
    be different on different implementations.  Given that reproducibility
    is not a goal of our salt generation logic, this was deemed acceptable

  We have C89 strict conformance as a goal because virtually every computer
  has a C89 compiler somewhere, and most serious computer languages have a
  provision for making a call into a C89 routine; hence if the customer
  decides to link this in with their manangement application, we have a good
  chance of reducing the effort required.  And, if you have a later version
  of C (or C++), that should work too (and you can run 'epp -verify' to
  check if the compiled version is working properly).

- It ought to be clear what the program is doing.  We're giving this to
  customers; we want to give people confidence in what we're doing, and they
  may need to adapt this for their own requirements.  Hence, transparency is
  a Good Thing; we consciously try to avoid clever (hard to understand) code

A nongoal is performance.  Now, we don't go out of our way to make things
inefficient, however if there is a conflict between performance and either
of the other two goals, the other two goals win.
